## PM2.5 Input Data

We receive a series of .RDS files from Joel Schwarz's team containing annual estimates of mean pm2.5
for each zip code. We have not been given permission to share these data, but the directory `annual_pm25` is created as a place holder. Yaguang Wei, a member of Joel's team wrote the following description of how the 
estimates were created:

>The daily and annual estimations of ambient PM2.5 at ZIP Codes across the continental US, 2000-2016, were aggregated from the estimations at 1km*1km grid cells. Below is a summary of how these estimations were created:
>
>The daily ambient PM2.5 at 1 km×1 km grid cells across the contiguous US, 2000-2016, were estimated by Qian Di  using well-validated ensemble models. Briefly, for each pollutant, they estimated daily concentrations at each grid cell by combining predictions from three machine learning algorithms (i.e., random forest, gradient boosting, and neural network) in a geographically weighted regression. Multiple sources of predictors were fused, including ground monitoring data, satellite-derived measurements of aerosol optical depth, meteorological conditions (e.g., daily air temperature, relative humidity, wind speed, and height of planetary boundary layer), chemical transport model simulations, and land-use variables (e.g., distance to major roads, emission, and land use pattern), etc.
>
>Using the daily predictions at 1 km×1 km grids, Yaguang Wei estimated daily concentrations at ZIP Codes across the contiguous US, 2000-2016. There are two major types of ZIP Codes: standard ZIP Code which is an area surrounding a post office, and PO Box which is used only for a particular facility, such as a large office building, university, bank, etc. For a standard ZIP Code, we estimated its daily concentrations by averaging the estimations at grid cells whose centroids fall within the boundary of that ZIP Code (there are no official boundaries defined by standard ZIP Codes, so we used the ZIP Code polygon data generated by Environmental Systems Research Institute a.k.a. “Esri”); for a PO Box, we estimated the daily concentrations by linking it to the nearest grid.


References:

- Di Q, Amini H, Shi L, et al. An ensemble-based model of PM2.5 concentration across the contiguous United States with high spatiotemporal resolution. Environ Int. 2019; 130: 104909.
- Di Q, Amini H, Shi L, et al. Assessing NO2 Concentration and Model Uncertainty with High Spatiotemporal Resolution across the Contiguous United States Using Ensemble Model Averaging. Environ Sci Technol. 2019.
- Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI). Esri Data & Maps 10: An Esri White Paper. 2010. Available from: http://downloads.esri.com/support/whitepapers/ao_/Esri_Data_and_Maps_10.pdf [Accessed 28 Sep. 2019].
